Watch two clear containers.
In the first, an ice cube sits on a plate and becomes liquid water.
In the second, a measured spoonful of salt is stirred into room-temperature water until the grains cannot be seen.
Both solids seem to vanish, but the stories differ.
The ice changed state: solid water became liquid water.
The salt spread through another material, water, to make a mixture.
That is dissolving.
Looking similar is not enough to name a process.
We need to track which materials are present, whether a new liquid state formed,
and what evidence could help us recover the hidden material.
Chemists use three role words.
The solute is the material that dissolves; in our example, salt is the solute.
The solvent is the liquid doing the dissolving; water is the solvent.
The solution is the even-looking mixture produced when the solute spreads through the solvent.
These are roles in a particular mixture, not permanent surnames.
Water is often a solvent, but not every liquid is water, and not every substance dissolves in water.
The word solution does not mean 'the answer to a question' here.
It names the whole mixture, including both the dissolved solute and the solvent.
For a low-risk investigation, use drinking water, table salt, identical clear cups, clean spoons, labels,
and adult supervision.
Wear eye protection if your class rules require it, wipe spills promptly, and wash hands afterwards.
The materials are known, but the cups are investigation samples, so do not taste them.
Never taste an unknown powder to identify it.
Do not mix household cleaners, medicines, garden chemicals, or mystery substances.
We can answer strong questions using tiny measured amounts of familiar salt and cool or lukewarm water.
No flame, kettle, hotplate, or boiling is needed, and the solution should be poured away as an adult directs.
Let us repair the common claim, 'The salt melted in the water.
' Melting means a solid becomes its own liquid because of a state change.
Dissolving means a solute spreads through a solvent to form a solution.
The salt has not become a little puddle of liquid salt.
At ordinary classroom temperatures, it remains salt distributed through water.
Warm water may help salt dissolve faster, but faster dissolving is still dissolving, not melting.
Temperature alone does not name the process.
Ask whether one material changed state or whether one material spread through another.
That question separates the two stories cleanly.
The cup may look clear after stirring, but clear does not mean pure water and invisible does not mean gone.
Our particle model shows salt spread among water particles.
This helps explain why separate grains are no longer visible.
The dots are symbols, not a photograph, and their size and spacing are not to scale.
The model gives us an idea to test.
Evidence from measured mass, saturation, or later recovery supports the claim that salt remains in the solution.
Now investigate rate: how quickly dissolving happens.
Put equal amounts of salt into equal volumes of water at the same temperature.
Stir one cup gently at a steady pace and leave the other still.
The stirred sample usually loses visible grains sooner because moving water repeatedly brings fresh solvent near the solute.
Stirring changes the rate, not necessarily the final maximum amount that can dissolve under those conditions.
To make this a fair comparison, change only stirring.
Equal salt, equal water, equal cups,
and equal temperature let us connect the different time to the factor we tested.
Particle size can also affect rate.
Compare one coarse salt sample with the same mass of fine salt in matching cups.
Fine grains expose more surface to the water, so they often dissolve faster when all other conditions match.
Use shop-bought food salt, pour it gently, and keep it away from faces.
Do not grind any material for this activity.
Again, faster does not mean more can dissolve.
The fine sample may finish first,
while both cups end with the same amount dissolved if each began below the saturation limit.
Temperature can change dissolving rate too.
An adult prepares equal cups of cool and lukewarm water, never hot enough to burn.
Add equal amounts of the same salt and stir each in the same way.
In this salt investigation, the grains may dissolve faster in warmer water.
Keep rate separate from amount: grains disappearing sooner tell us about time.
They do not tell us the greatest amount of salt that the water can hold.
Our result is about this salt and this test, not every solute.
Amount asks a different question:
how much solute can dissolve in a fixed volume of solvent under stated conditions?
Imagine adding salt in small measured portions, stirring for the same generous time after each addition.
Early portions disappear from sight.
Eventually, extra salt may remain on the bottom even after patient stirring.
Stirring harder might help grains dissolve sooner, but it cannot guarantee unlimited dissolving.
A stopwatch answers rate.
A count or mass of added portions helps answer amount.
Mixing those questions leads to weak conclusions,
such as claiming that the fastest cup must always hold the most solute.
A solution is saturated when, under those conditions,
it holds as much dissolved solute as it can and added solute remains undissolved.
We approach this point carefully with small portions rather than dumping in a large pile.
Salt resting at the bottom after enough stirring is evidence that the current water cannot dissolve all the added salt.
It is not proof that no salt dissolved; the solution above contains dissolved salt while excess solid remains.
Saturation depends on the solute, solvent, temperature, and amount of solvent.
Change those conditions and the maximum dissolved amount may change too.
Suppose a saturated salt solution has crystals on the bottom.
Add a measured amount of fresh water and stir again.
Some remaining crystals may dissolve because there is now more solvent available.
This is evidence that the earlier limit belonged to that particular amount of water under those conditions;
the salt had not lost the ability to dissolve.
Notice what we changed: solvent amount.
If we also changed temperature, stirring, and salt type, we could not tell which factor mattered.
Careful investigations isolate one question at a time and record exact amounts instead of relying on cup height or a quick glance.
How can we show that dissolved salt is still present?
Recover it.
In an adult-led demonstration,
place a small amount of salt solution in a wide labelled dish and let water evaporate naturally in a secure place over several days.
No heating is required.
As water leaves into the air, salt crystals remain in the dish.
The recovered crystals are strong evidence that the salt was part of the solution, not destroyed.
Keep the dish away from children, pets, food areas, and open windows, and do not taste the crystals.
Recovery may be incomplete because some solution can spill or cling to equipment.
A sensitive balance offers another line of evidence.
Measure a closed container holding water and a separate salt packet.
Then combine them without losing material and measure the closed system again.
The total mass should stay about the same.
Dissolving changes how salt is spread, not the amount of matter.
This belongs in an app or adult-led setup because an ordinary kitchen balance may not show small changes clearly.
A slightly different last digit does not prove matter vanished.
Good science reports the tool's limit instead of forcing the reading to look perfect.
Water does not dissolve every material.
Clean sand settles, cooking oil forms a separate layer,
and too much salt leaves crystals when saturation is reached.
These outcomes are different.
Sand in water is a mixture with undissolved solid.
Oil and water form separate liquid regions.
Extra salt can sit beneath a saturated salt solution even though some salt has dissolved.
Do not call every mixture a solution or decide from colour alone.
Observe whether the mixture becomes even-looking, whether material settles, and whether it can be recovered.
These observations tell us what happened, but not every reason why.
Here is the complete story.
A solute spreads through a solvent to form a solution; that process is dissolving, not melting.
Stirring, smaller grains, and temperature can change the rate, which means how fast.
The maximum amount dissolved is a separate question.
When added solute remains after thorough stirring, the solution may be saturated under those conditions.
Adding more solvent can change the limit,
and natural evaporation can recover the solute as evidence that it never vanished.
Particle diagrams help us imagine spreading but are simplified, not-to-scale models.
Use known safe materials, tiny quantities, no tasting, no household chemicals, and no child-led heating.